Welcome back. We've been talking about matrix
factorization techniques. And it's my privilege to have
Arindam Banerjee here today to take us a step deeper as we look at
multidimensional matrix factorization. So, Arindam is Associate Professor and
McKnight Land-Grant Professor here at the University of Minnesota
in Computer Science and Engineering. And he's here today because he's an expert
in machine learning and data mining. And has been applying that to a variety
of problems, including collaborative filtering, and including advances
in matrix factorization techniques. Some of you who are in
the data mining community may recognize that he was
the program co-chair for SIAM's International Conference on
Data Mining just a couple of years ago. But, welcome to our course. >> Thank you. Thanks for having me.
>> So, as we were talking setting up for this interview. The real question that arose was, what
can we do to improve matrix factorization techniques to bring back, what I'm loosely
going to call content attributes or you could even call meta data. We know that content preferences are real
and might help improve performance. We also know that one of the weaknesses of
matrix factorization is that you end up with really hard to understand profiles,
that the dimensions of the factorized rating matrix
are rarely understandable. And so you were telling me about some
ideas for, how we can think about this problem a little bit more generally,
why don't you lead us through those ideas? >> Sure, yea. So when you think of the basic
problem typically mostly people think about the user versus movie. There's a ratings matrix and
that's how your data looks like. But if you really look at the data more
carefully, you'll realize that you'll probably have some demographic
information or other information. For the individual users you'll have
information related to the movies, like the cast, the reviews,
and other things, right? And if you just focus on the user
versus movie ratings matrix, that one data matrix, you are missing
out on these other attributes, the site information and
the content that is there. So a more general way to sort of
thing about is simultaneously take into account all these multiple dimensions
as you are doing the factorization. And of course,
the data looks much more complicated. So as you can see sort of
in this schematic diagram. The yellow thing is your usual
user versus movies ratings matrix. But the users are sort
of at the bottom and they have demographic
information jetting out in blue. And then the movies are along the columns,
and then so there's reviews associated with the movies
and there's movie cast and so on. So this is how your data
really looks like, so the goal really is instead of just
focusing on that yellow matrix. Can we take into account all of these
as we are trying to do the matrix factorization? And that's sort of this
multiple dimensions, and doing a collective matrix factorization. >> And so then,
we're going to start by modeling the way these various
dimensions come together. Why don't you walk us through
this in a graph representation? >> Right, so one way to think about this
kind of a data is on the left hand side we have some things like viewers,
actors, movies and review words. So this is sort of what will be used for
the reviews. So these are the entities in some ways. And the relationship between
sort of a viewer and a movie is a ratings matrix right. And now if you pay attention that
if a viewer is actually rating individual actors in a movie,
that will be a viewer actor movie ratings. It will be multiple matrices, where every
ratings matrix corresponds to one actor. Now, if you look at the costing matrix, that's a relationship between
the actors and the movies. So, that’s a matrix connecting movies
with the actors participating in it. Then movies and review words
are connected by their reviews, viewers are connected to demographics. So, this relation graph essentially
with entities on the left-hand side and relationships on the right-hand side. Sort of, and you can draw it based
on what kind of data you have. So that it's fully laid out,
you know what kinds of things you have. The righthand side things are usually
matrices, the lefthand side thing are indices of those matrices
of the sides of the matrices. >> So just as an example,
if we were going to add in genres. We could have those as entities and we
might have a relationship that movies have genres but we also might have that viewers
have expressed a preference for genres. >> Exactly, that's a perfect example. So we'll have one entity on the left
hand side which will be genres and the movie and genre will connect
to that matrix with just. And similarly for viewers,
we can have that as well. >> Right, and as you pointed out, this can allow some fairly
sophisticated relationships. So, one of the things that our typical
systems don't allow is saying g I liked Sandra Bullock in
a particular movie and of course I'm in the blind side but
I didn't like her in a different movie. >> Sure. >> And
that type of deep rating relationship of course requires some challenging
interfaces to get people to express it. But if you're mining reviews, you may
very well get that data as a byproduct. >> Yes, and
that'll be sort of a very rich data. So, in this case, it'll be the viewers
are actually rating the individual actors in movies and
that's difficult to do, but they often express those thoughts in their
reviews as well and we can extract that. >> Wonderful. So before we actually
go through this graph, one of the things we're going to talk
about is that you've actually done this. And probably be useful to take
a few minutes to just talk through, what does it mean to take
multiple matrices like these and factor them together so
as to come back with a better model? >> Right, so what we usually do is that is
let's say you have an entity like a movie. And then when you're looking at
just the movie versus user matrix, the ratings matrix, you get a latent
factor or representation for each movie. Now when you have multiple such
entities and relationships, the movies will still have
this latent representation like as a vector as you said those
dimensions are hard to interpret. But every movie will have sort of a maybe
five dimensional vector representation. So, we will try to actually
maintain this dimensionality across the various relationships
movies participate in. And this will be true for every entity. And things become a little complicated,
you are right. But we are simultaneously
trying to factorize all of these matrices that have
come up while constraining the individual latent factors to be
the same across the whole relationship. Or only very, in a slight manner
across the different relationships. >> So I'm going to try to echo this back
and make sure that I understand it and. >> Sure. >> Hopefully that
are learners understand it. What we normally have been doing is
we have a two-dimensional matrix and the underlying latent dimensions we come
up with are the optimal dimensions for reconstructing that two dimensional
matrix at a particular rank. That's nice because it's optimal but it only counts two dimensions
worth of information. If we now come out and say well
what I have is users to movies and then cast to movies and
we co-factor these. We're going to come up with different
set of dimensions that allows both matrices to share
the latent dimensions so that a movie in one has
the same vector approximately. >> Yeah. >> Has a movie in the other. >> Yeah. >> It sounds like part of what
we're going to end up with is a dimensionalization that's not as
perfect for either matrix alone but that jointly is better and gives us the ability
to bring those two matrices together. >> Exactly that's perfectly correct. And we simultaneously approximating both
these matrices and that representation for every movie will be different for had we
only looked at one of those matrices. >> So one of the questions obviously is,
so does it work? So why don't you tell us how it works? >> Yeah.
So I think in the literature now, there are many different
models trying to do this. What we have shown in the plot over here. So our comparisons between PMF. Which stands for
probabilistic matrix factorization. This is the paper that became popular
during the Netflix competition, the PMF paper. And GPMF is a variant that we cooked up,
which is a generalized version of PMF which can take into account these
additional dimensions and factors. So in this particular comparison,
as we are increasing the rank. We are showing how the performance
improves where you have, just like Joe said,
that you have the ratings matrix. And you also have the movie
versus cast matrix and you're trying to sort of capture that. So as you give more rank, as you increase the rank you can see that
the performance of this more fancy model. The GPMF actually keeps improving because
it can take advantage of this additional information that's available in
the cast and it can align that and can understand what types
of movies the user likes. What kinds of people work in
similar types of movies and so on. So there are been sort of a parallel
development in machine learning, data mining, and other areas. So if you look for things like
collective matrix factorization, there's a whole bunch of
models that go by that name. Which try to accomplish similar things. And you should be able to find, you know,
enough ideas on how to this can be done. But this is just one such
idea that we worked on. And it definitely showed improvement. >> Well it's neat, because it shows
both things on the same graph. It shows one that this is always better. Even though we're not doing the single
perfect metrics factorization, having more data gives us a better result. >> Right.
>> But what we're also showing is that the total amount of information in
the system Is increasing because we're able to take advantage
of more dimensions. >> Right.
>> And obviously what PMF is showing is it
gets worse is that it’s over fitting. >> Yes, exactly. >> Because it's used all
the information it could possibly use. >> Exactly, its sees the [INAUDIBLE]. >> So the one other thing that comes out
nicely from this is a little bit better hope of having some forms of content
understanding and bring up both of these. From your work you had talked about
how you could find cast clusters by identifying clusters of cast members. That had nearby vector representations,
>> Right. >> Of this representation. >> Right. >> Can you tell us
a little bit about that? >> Sure, yeah, so in the example that we are talking
about you have a user by movie matrix. Which is like usual ratings matrix and
the movie by cast matrix, which is sort of the new
thing we threw in and then we are sort of looking
at the joined factorization. So you are going to get this latent factor
representation for every actor or actress. And then you can cluster them
based on these five dimensional or ten dimensional representation. You can do just run around
something like [INAUDIBLE] or do something more fancy to find
clusters among the actors. So we looked at some of the results and
some of it made sense so we found one cluster where mostly
the science fiction actors got together a lot of Star Trek, you know Apollo 13. Ed Harris and Nimoy and so on. All of them grouped together. We found another cluster which is
largely actors in the 40s through 60s. You know, Cary Grant,
Humphrey Bogart and people like them. So so some of these actually, if you carefully start poring over
the results, they make more sense and there's a better interpretability as
to what may be going on over here. >> Well, part of the thing that makes
this kind of analysis neat is that it can sometimes help you either back or
refute intuitions. And so-
>> Yeah. >> You look at the bottom there and Paul Newman actually did most of
his acting after many of those people had stopped.
>> Right. >> But there's this sense that he
was a throwback to the type of actor of an earlier era. And what we can see is that if you
look at the data of the movies that are liked by people and
the actors that are in them. When we bring all of this
together sure enough. He sits there along side Cary Grant and Humphrey Bogart as opposed to some of
the actors who might have been later and part of a different
generation stylistically. >> Yeah, that's true. >> And so none of this
necessarily means that you have an easy time again describing
what the dimensions are. >> That is true. >> That's always going to be a challenge
with matrix factorization techniques. But you might have
an easier time explaining some attributes of a movie that
somebody would like because you can express it in terms of
some of these content spaces. >> That is true and in some ways these
clusters are post processed versions of those latent factors. So we did a clustering on those factors
and then this is somewhat interpretable, but you're right that the dimensions of
those latent factors are still difficult to interpret. >> So one last question,
where is this type of technology in terms of the continuum from
an idea in the research lab, out to everybody uses it in
all of their systems today? >> So my sense is, and
this is more coming from academia is that this has been explored quite extensively
and there's lots of ideas out there. I think one challenge in
adopting this fully Is that, first of all,
as you throw in more types of entities. The data sparsity problem is exacerbated. You have just many more of
these large sparse matrices. And then the scale of
the problem increases. So you have to sort of come up with
tractable algorithms which scale to the right things. >> So I think that's where things are, people are navigating their way
through these, is my understanding. >> So it sounds like it's
a technology to keep an eye on. >> Yeah. >> And it wouldn't be surprising if
we start seeing some of the industry leaders jumping into these ideas, to try to ratchet their
recommenders up a little notch. >> Yeah, I think so. >> Well, wonderful. Thank you so much for joining us. >> Thanks for having me. >> And we'll see you again soon.